Hello, and welcome to yet another worked
exercise.
I'm the author of the book Python for
Informatics: Exploring Information,
as well as your host for this
particular worked exercise.
As always, the book, this audio and video,
and these slides are copyright Creative
Commons Attribution, and
I hope you find exciting and interesting
ways to
reuse them and re-purpose them and add to
them.
So pythonlearn.com is my support website
for the Python for Informatics book.
And if you, hopefully by now you've got
all this
worked out, but it does teach you how to
get started.
So that, how all the things that you need
to know,
to edit files and use the command line to run
Python programs you've got figured out.
Okay?
So our program for today is from the list
chapter.
And our program is actually, we're
going to debug a program
rather than just writing a program from
scratch.
And so what our, our task is, in this
program is we're looking
for words that start with from,
looking for lines that start with from.
And on the lines that start with from,
we're going to pull out the
day of the week that this particular
email message was sent. Saturday, Friday,
whatever.
And so the structure of the program
is pretty standard.
We're going to open a file at the top.
We're going to loop through the file.
Strip the newlines at the end, right?
There's a little newline at the end of
each line.
And then we're going to use split to split
it into words,
which means that'll make this the
zero word, the one word,
and the two word.
And then we're going to check the zero
word to see if it's from,
and if the zero word's not from we're
uninterested in that line so we're going
to skip back up. And if it is good, if we
we find a line
we're interested in, we're going to skip
the majority of the lines in this file.
Less than one in 100 of these lines
actually
have from in the, as the first word.
And then the second word is what we're
interested in
so we're going to print the, the day of
the week.
So this program as we type it in is going
to have a
traceback and we go like, you know, as soon
as you see traceback
you immediately are drawn to the word
traceback and maybe you've gotten to
the point where you start to read the why,
list index out of range.
And then, you know, it says line five, so
that's kind of helpful.
But the first thing to not get distracted
about is, is this.
Our program actually ran a little bit.
So when you look at a traceback, look
right above it and make sure, and
maybe you won't see any output, but maybe
your program will have partially run,
and so
don't immediately assume the program is
totally broken. So this
is actually successful output of one of
the many from lines.
And it, it dies later.
And so, as we debug it, we'll sort of come
up with techniques to sort of figure out
how much your program has done before it
died,
because that might be an important,
important question to answer.
How far did your program get, because if
it dies before the first line, or on
the first line, that's something different
than if
it goes like 300 lines and then dies.
If it goes a long ways, 300 lines, and
then dies,
maybe there's something subtle or weird
about the line it's dying on,
rather than just your program is
just like totally broken.
So you got, look for something where your
program actually partially worked,
and helps you kind of narrow down
your suspicions as
to what might be wrong with this.
So let's get on with the, let's get on
with the programming.
And so I will simply steal this.
I'll cut and paste it.
And that will be that.
So I'm going to cut and paste this into my
TextWrangler.
Now it's always dangerous cutting and
pasting.
But I'm cutting and pasting from a slide
which seems
to work a little better than cutting and
pasting from PDFs.
And you can even get away with cutting and
pasting with PDFs as long as you don't
freak out
when the first thing you see is a bunch
of crazy syntax errors because of
characters being coded improperly.
So now I'm in this file, and I'm going to
save this.
Save As, and I'll put this on my Desktop
in the lists folder.
And we'll call this day of the week .py in the
lists folder.
Okay, and of course it's, syntax
colored it, which makes my TextWrangler
syntax colored it, and so I've got sitting
in this lists folder, I've got the
day of the week .py.
Now one of the things that we've got to do
is we've actually got to get our data file.
See this mbox-short.txt?
So the mbox-short.txt is sitting here on
pythonlearn.com.
I'll go to the book page and you'll see
this, all the stuff and code samples.
Including maybe a worked version of this
example, you just never know.
[NOISE] It doesn't look like
this one's here but
the file I'm looking for is mbox dot
short dot t-x-t.
So there it is.
It's a mailing thing and here's one of
those lines
we're looking at and we're going to
there's many of them.
This happens to be the first line of the
file.
So I'm going to make sure that I save this
into the folder.
Go back to my Desktop and put it in lists
and then save it.
And so.
At that point I should be able to go back
and see ah-hah, I have mbox-short.txt.
Now the interesting thing is if you read
this file, [SOUND] if you open this file,
TextWrangler's perfectly happy.
So we see from.
So if I was to do sort of a search, and I
want to search for the string
capital From space. Okay?
And then I'm going to search next.
Oh, there's lots of them.
I'm going to make them case sensitive,
okay?
So it'll only be the Froms that are case
sensitive.
There we go, and so in a sense our program is
doing this little From where it's looking.
It's throwing away all the lines except
those that start with
From and a space, because of the way the
split works.
And then it's going to pull these, these
days of the week, these Fridays.
So I'm kind of doing, if I was doing it by
hand it
would be like find the line that starts
with From blank, and then
grab this little text, and that's what I'm
interested in.
Maybe I'm curious as to whether or not
these
folks work on the weekends or on the
weekdays.
And that's the purpose of this.
Okay?
So I'll close this.
Just, it's, that's what, that's the, Close
Document.
There we go.
So here's my little program.
And so, let's, I can get rid of this now.
So now I'm going to go into my Desktop.
I'm in my home directory.
cd Desktop, cd lists. If I do ls, there
I am.
I've got this day, day of the week Python
program, and mbox-short.txt sitting here.
So I'm going to run it [SOUND]
and there it works.
I'll get, I mean, well, works for some
value of work.
So we get the same traceback the lecture
slide suggested
we would, and thankfully that probably
means the lecture slide's right.
So, so here we go.
We got, we got this one thing where the
day of the
week is kind of coming out and then it
dies on line five.
And it even gives us the line it's dying on.
So, it's complaining about list index out
of range, and you
might be able to stare at this and maybe
you're smart.
You're, you have enough skill already that
you're seeing these kinds of errors and
you
just read it right away, know what the
problem is, but that's not so much fun.
So here I am in line five, right?
I'm going to go right to line five.
And, and so the first thing I want to do
on line five,
is I often add a print statement right
before the line that's dying.
And I'll just print out something.
Something random.
Just, it, you know, sometimes I print the
letter a out, right?
And so now I'll save this.
And now I'm going to run it again,
and this tells me, just by putting a print
statement in, what's going on here.
It's like, okay wait a sec.
This is the good line.
This is the line, I mean, this is the line
I'm interested in.
As a matter of fact, I'm going to make
another change
just to help me sort of visually see
what's going on.
I'm going to put like a bunch of
equal signs at
the beginning of this line and now I'm
going to run it again.
So if I look, it's like, oh, dude, that's
the good line.
That's the line I'm liking.
And here's my debugging, Something random,
Something random, Something random.
So a lot of stuff is going on here.
And then finally it dies, right?
So finally, it dies here.
Now, it's line six because I added a line.
So the, so perhaps instead of printing
out Something random, I'll print something
useful.
So, the first thing to do is to look at
this statement, the one that's dying.
And say, what is the most suspicious thing
in here, okay?
And, and so, if something's going wrong
with this
words sub zero, it's saying index out of
range, right?
Something going wrong with words sub zero.
So what's the deal?
So I'm not going to print out words sub
zero, I'm going to print out words.
I'm going to say, like, what is in this
words list at this point?
So now let me save that.
So instead of printing something random,
we'll see a bunch of words go by.
And so here's that first line broken
into words, where From, Stephen Marquard,
Saturday.
And here's our good line.
And then here's one that doesn't have From
as the first word, so we skip it.
Here's one that doesn't.
So let's continue onto where it's, you
know,
we see lots of lines, everything's
cruising along.
We actually see one that says From colon,
but that's not what we're looking for.
So that one gets skipped too.
So make sure you skip that.
Now, here we are.
Here's the words.
Here's that list of words that we've
split.
Now, this was the line before, here's the
next line.
It's like, okay, what's going on here?
That looks like an empty list.
Okay, so I'm a little more curious, I'm
going to,
I'm going to print, I'm going to print
line out too.
And I'm going to put, just so I
know what's
going on, I'll stick some, a couple
of pluses in front of that.
So the line will have pluses on it, and
it'll print the word.
So let's run this again.
So I'm adding junk to this, right?
So now when I look at my things, the
pluses mean that's the line I'm seeing.
Right?
I just put those pluses in for my own
visible, so I can visually see it more
naturally.
That's the line, and you can see how nicely
it breaks
it into words. Sso it breaks this line at
the space.
Oops, sorry.
That was not so good.
It, it breaks this line, spam probability
line, at this space and gives me two words.
Right?
So here we are.
Two, here we go.
Here's this space, and then it breaks
it into one word, and another word.
And so that's working.
But if I look here, that's the line that
I'm on.
Oh, well that's a blank line.
Hang on a sec, hang on a sec. So let's
just real quick take a look at that file
again.
Let's look at that file. And so here we
go, here we go
So that's cool, that's cool, that's cool,
let's look at the line.
And here we go, so if you look.
The last thing that we read successfully
was this line right here.
This line is a blank line, so our program
is choking on blank lines.
It's not failing on lines that work right,
and it's
not failing on lines that don't have From
in them.
It can handle the From line fine, it can
handle the, any other line fine.
But it freaks out on the simplest of
things, blank lines.
So the question is, how do we fix this?
Right?
How do we deal with this fact that
this bit
of code right here is dying whenever
there's a blank line, okay?
So the way we do this is what's called
the guardian pattern.
Now I'm going to get rid of this.
So one of the guardian patterns is it
looks like this.
So, we don't want to get to this.
So we want to put something in front of it
to
make sure we never hit it in a dangerous
situation.
So it's if hmm, hmm, hmm, something,
continue.
And this is if, we'll call this thing the
safety check.
Check.
If some safety check, continue.
So that means that, you know, you know, if
the safety check matches,
we're going to not fall through and not do
this dangerous line.
So the question is what would we put in as
the
safety check here to protect. This line is
guarding this line.
That's what the guardian pattern means, is do
something before the scary thing that
hurts you.
Okay?
So, one thing we can do is we can say,
okay, well, what's words?
Well words is an empty list.
You know what?
If, if I got an empty list of words, I
have no interest in this.
So if I say words is equal to an empty
list, continue.
So what this basically says is.
You know.
Read the line, strip it, split it into
words.
We'll print it.
If it's an empty list, continue and go up
to the next line.
And then, if it is a non-empty list, it
continues here
and checks to see if the first word is
From.
And if it is not, it continues, and then if
it works, it works.
So this here, this line here, is
the guardian line, it's
guarding the, this other line and you
gotta do it in order.
If you do the guard, you have to
have the guardian happen before the line
in question.
So now let's run it.
Oops.
Let's run it, and now it works great.
It's, we got a little too much crap, so we
better get rid of this print statement.
It didn't give me a traceback, right?
So now I'm going to get rid of that print
statement and look at that.
I'm getting the line Saturday, Friday,
Friday, Friday, Friday, Thursday.
So it doesn't look like these people work
weekends.
But it does look like they like finishing
up stuff toward the end of the week.
So, there we go.
I mean, it's a little bit of, it's not
much data to conclude anything solidly.
Maybe if we look at the bigger mailbox
file, we can find something else.
Okay, so now it works.
Let me show you a couple of other things
that you could have used as a guardian
pattern.
So we could say  if the words we got back is
an empty list.
I could say if the number of elements in
words is less than one, continue.
That basically says, look, if the words
that I got, if I got fewer than
one word, then I'm not going to look
for the first word, because that's quite
dangerous.
So if I run that, it again works.
Another more direct, even potentially more
direct, would be if. Let's move this up.
I could say if line is equal to empty
string, continue.
So now what it says is, you know, if I'm
getting a blank line,
I'm not even going to bother splitting it
because I know exactly what's going to
happen.
So let's see if this works.
So this one works as well.
So now I've got, you know, a couple of
codes, a couple of code paths through here.
Right? If, if the blank line, I do it after
the strip to make sure it is really empty.
I skip blank lines this way. I come all
the way down
and split and then skip lines that don't
start with From this way.
And the only way I make it all the way
down to here is if it is
a non-blank line and if the first word is
a From, and then I do my thing.
So that basically is the notion of
the guardian pattern, and the pattern is
simply,
if there is some code that might have a
problem depending on perhaps user input,
put something in before it
that makes sure that you never get to the
dangerous code.
And don't use a try/except for this.
That just would be tacky, tacky, tacky,
tacky.
So that's the end of this this
presentation.
So thanks a lot, and see you on the net.